# Artist Statement

Coral Grief: A Digital Reframing Of Nature

Dominant narratives tell us that nature is something humans have transcended beyond; such frameworks are interlaced with stories of man vs. nature (fear, disasters, conquests, and defeats) and the premises of bounded (or neoliberal) individualism and human exceptionalism. The way we “frame” something is the way in which we are telling a story of it, it tells us how to understand it and relate to it. This anthropocentric way of framing nature is not sufficient enough figurally or scientifically and has caused frustrating and ineffective responses to climate change.

My project Coral Grief is an interactive digital manifesto based on an essay I wrote: “Coral Grief: A Manifesto for Response-Ability.” It is inspired by the Crochet Coral Reef project and feminist scholar Donna Haraway, who, in her interdisciplinary writings, provides vivid imagery and new languages that nourish our capacity to think, celebrate our biodiverse entanglement, and show the world on multiple scales. Coral Grief takes the user through the manifesto one line at a time, while displaying stylized coral that responds to the manifesto and to the user’s actions. The manifesto is an attempt at finding a new way to frame nature as a complex, dynamic, responsive, situated, and dying system. The manifesto’s tenets offer a way of making-with the ecological situation we find ourselves in; a way of persisting during ecological collapse without guilt; a way to mourn the loss of ecosystems; a way to cultivate on-goingness and recognize our collective response-ability.

In the face of onrushing ecological disaster and mass extinction, anthropocentric language is not good enough figurally or scientifically; it cannot think well about any sort of “rehabilitation (making liva-ble again) and sustainability amid the… damaged but still ongoing living worlds, like the planet earth and its denizens,” (Haraway 2016, 33) both human and non-human alike. For example, the sciences of the Anthropocene are contained by restrictive theories under the guise of the Modern Synthesis: it conceptualizes the world as highly mathematized, and is unable to think well about sympoiesis, symbiosis, microbiology, and developmental phenomena. The Anthropocene is cynical in its speculative thinking of the future and tells stories of a self-fulfilling apocalypse. It is interlaced with the premises of bounded (or neoliberal) individualism and human exceptionalism amended by autopoiesis, which misleads us down deadly paths (Haraway, 33). Popular scientific discourses adopt the Anthropocene for discussing globalization and climate change, but imaginative thinking and effective work is made impossible (both of which are extremely crucial in these times of urgency) while under a false narrative and wallowing in despair. Providing a new framework that nourishes generative and creative intellectual work is the first step for effective solutions for climate change.

I took a lot of inspiration from Daniel Shiffman’s book “The Nature of Code” in which he explores the mathematical principles behind our nature and provides programming techniques for creating simulations. I’ve been researching and experimenting with differential growth and L systems to generate coral-like structures, however while creating a prototype I had to scratch both of these ideas because the math was beyond my capabilities. Using Javascript and the P5.js library, the final project involves unique “coral” objects that are composed of an array of vectors that move and wobble using perlin noise, dancing and breathing as if they were alive! The coral slowly decays (by getting smaller and smaller) and turns pale, mimicking real-life bleached coral, until it eventually disappears; to prevent this the user must consistently hover their mouse over each coral. The playground state allows the user to freely engage with the coral by generating and deleting new corals anywhere on the screen, creating their own ecosystem.

By hosting a coral ecosystem on a screen, using technology as a medium, I am attempting to reflect Haraway’s sentiments about the death of the coral reefs: grieving the coral reefs is about staying with the trouble. Rather than talk about solutions as a way to move backwards and revert the world back to its “originary” state, before it was threatened by humans, we must recognize that the death of the coral reef constitutes a major change in us.

Coral Grief aims to simulate a world in which the user can experience intimacy without proximity by participating in the interconnectedness of the natural world without disturbing the critters who call the reefs home. My project creates a new way to frame nature by discussing the environmental impact humanity has upon natural environments without paralyzing the user with fear and guilt. Instead, the participant can engage in an earthly mutualism that reframes our preconceptions of nature. There is still a lot left unresolved, a framework can only help us reconfigure our understandings but does not provide a solid solution or course of action. However, this reframing is the first step in making cultural space that allow generative and creative intellectual work to find effective solutions for climate change. My piece attempts to reframe our understanding of nature and exhibit a new story—a multispecies story that tells us consequences but not determinisms, and aligns humanity with all its ontological/biological allies.
